Docs: Add documentation for Databricks batch export destination (#13238)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/docs/cdp/batch-exports/databricks.md

---
title: Databricks destination for batch exports
sidebar: Docs
showTitle: true
availability:
  free: full
  selfServe: full
  enterprise: full
---

Batch exports can be used to export data to a Databricks Delta table.

> **Note:** The Databricks destination is currently in `beta`. This means the configuration and features are subject to change.
>
> You can request access via the [in-app support form](https://us.posthog.com/#panel=support%3Asupport%3Abatch_exports%3Alow%3Atrue).

## Requirements

To create a batch export to Databricks, you need the following:

> - A Databricks account with the [Premium plan or above](https://www.databricks.com/product/pricing/platform-addons)

Reviewer: e.g. "A databricks account with SQL warehouse feature", or whatever it is we need from premium plan.

I also don't want to seem like we are endorsing a particular subscription to them.

- A Databricks workspace with Unity Catalog enabled
- A SQL warehouse
- A catalog and schema you wish to use
- A service principal with [OAuth Machine-to-Machine (M2M)](https://docs.databricks.com/aws/en/dev-tools/auth/oauth-m2m) authentication configured. This is the only authentication type we support currently. This service principal must have the appropriate permissions (see below)

## Setup instructions

### 1. SQL warehouse

Batch exports uses SQL warehouses to export data into your Delta tables.

You can use either an existing warehouse, or you can [create a new one](https://docs.databricks.com/aws/en/compute/sql-warehouse/create).

You will need to make a note of the **Server hostname** and **HTTP path** for your warehouse:

1. In Databricks, navigate to **SQL Warehouses**.
2. Select your SQL warehouse.
3. Go to the **Connection details** tab.
4. Copy the **Server hostname** (e.g. `abc123.cloud.databricks.com`).
5. Copy the **HTTP path** (e.g. `/sql/1.0/warehouses/abc123def456`).

### 2. Set up catalog and schema

1. In your Databricks workspace, create a catalog (or use an existing one) where PostHog will export data.

> 2. Create a schema within that catalog (or use an existing one).

Reviewer 2: what are the requirements for this schema? I assume it needs to be formed a certain way related to your ph data?

> 3. Note the names of both the catalog and schema - you'll need these when configuring the batch export.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Note the names of both the catalog and schema – you'll need these when configuring the batch export.
```

> > **Note:** You can also create the destination table manually, however, in general we recommend allowing PostHog to create tables for you to ensure the data schemas are correct.

Reviewer 2: I think we can flip this and say:

```suggestion
> **Note:** Don't create tables manually. PostHog will create destination tables for you to ensure the data schemas are correct.
```

Its a useful note if we have firm advice

> > **Note:** You can also create the destination table manually, however, in general we recommend allowing PostHog to create tables for you to ensure the data schemas are correct.

Author: have reworded this slightly

> > **Note:** You can also create the destination table manually, however, in general we recommend allowing PostHog to create tables for you to ensure the data schemas are correct.

Reviewer 2: General advice on this is: provide a strong opinion for the readers, with caveats on when/why you might deviate.

This way there's always a easy "try this first" people can follow :)

- `MODIFY` - Required to insert and update data

You can grant these permissions using SQL commands in Databricks:

```sql runInPostHog=false
-- Grant catalog permissions
GRANT USE CATALOG ON CATALOG `<catalog_name>` TO `<service_principal_id_or_group>`;

-- Grant schema permissions
GRANT USE SCHEMA ON SCHEMA `<catalog_name>`.`<schema_name>` TO `<service_principal_id_or_group>`;
GRANT CREATE TABLE ON SCHEMA `<catalog_name>`.`<schema_name>` TO `<service_principal_id_or_group>`;
GRANT CREATE VOLUME ON SCHEMA `<catalog_name>`.`<schema_name>` TO `<service_principal_id_or_group>`;

-- Grant table permissions (only needed if the table already exists)
GRANT SELECT ON TABLE `<catalog_name>`.`<schema_name>`.`<table_name>` TO `<service_principal_id_or_group>`;
GRANT MODIFY ON TABLE `<catalog_name>`.`<schema_name>`.`<table_name>` TO `<service_principal_id_or_group>`;
```

> **Note:** Replace `<catalog_name>`, `<schema_name>`, `<table_name>`, and `<service_principal_id_or_group>` with your actual values. You can either assign permissions to the service principal directly or via a [group](https://docs.databricks.com/aws/en/admin/users-groups/groups).

## Creating the batch export

> 1. Click [Data pipelines](https://app.posthog.com/pipeline) in the navigation and go to the **Destinations** tab.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. In PostHog, click [Data pipelines](https://app.posthog.com/pipeline) in the navigation and go to the **Destinations** tab.
```

- Rows that match in the destination table and have newer version fields in the stage table are updated.
- New rows not found in the destination table are inserted.
- Your data always reflects the latest state while maintaining historical records that haven't been updated.

### What is the benefit of table partitioning?

Partitioning your Databricks table can significantly improve query performance, especially for large datasets. When you partition by a field like `timestamp`, Databricks can skip reading entire partitions of data when you filter by that field in your queries.

For example, if you partition by `timestamp` and run a query filtering for events from the last 7 days, Databricks will only scan the relevant partitions rather than the entire table.

By default, PostHog automatically partitions:
- Events tables by `timestamp`
- Sessions tables by `end_timestamp`

You can override this by specifying a different partition field in the configuration.

### Should I use VARIANT or STRING type for JSON fields?

We recommend using `VARIANT` (the default) for the following reasons:
- Better query performance for nested JSON data
- More efficient storage

> - Type safety and validation

Reviewer: How does using variant type provide type safety and validation? the json can still be garbage.

Author: yep, have removed since it was confusing
